To what extent can Multiple Stream Framework be used to explain the new measures taken
in food policy to fight obesity in Chile?
In the last twenty years obesity has emerged as one of the most critical issues in public health
around the world. Chile has not been the exception and great efforts have being rolled out by the
government to decrease the obesity levels.
The awareness about this problem began to grow within the Chilean political actors from year
2000. President Ricardo Lagos (2000-2006) and his successor President Michelle Bachelet
(2006-2010) were aware about the issue. During both governments a great number of health
programs were focused on obesity. Most of them were based on prevention and the
promotion of healthy nutrition habits and active life style. A policy community shaped by the
Ministry of Health and Education were working hard to succeed in the fight against obesity.
Furthermore, the policy community was also shaped by representatives of the industry food
who start giving support.
In 2007, a group of senators presented a project of law aimed to fight obesity from a legislative
frame. They proposed the “Project of law N°20.606 about food nutritional composition and its
advertising” which took under consideration the recommendations from the Global Strategy
against obesity (WHO 2004) whereby key elements of the strategy were: information for
consumers, labelling, advertising and the necessity of governments to work in regulatory
measures. Furthermore, the project of law was elaborated with support of the scientific
community whereby national and international prestigious specialists worked in the technical
design of the law. This was principally composed of four measures: mandatory use of frontal
aware labelling for packaged food with the words “High on” (Calories, fat, sugar or salt);
prohibition of selling “high on” foods in schools; prohibition of advertising “high on” foods on
TV and other media and the use of marketing strategies to attract minor fourteen age
consumers; mandatory nutrition education and promotion of exercise in schools.
The aim of this essay is explain the development of a new-focused and much stronger measure
to decrease levels of obesity in Chile. In this sense, I will attempt to give an explanation about
why a new measure to fight obesity was taken into account by decision-makers despite of the
important conflicts this law would bring to the food industry.
In order to analyse this policy change, I will apply Multiple Stream Framework to analyse the
three streams proposed by Kingdon: Problem, policy and politics and identify policy
entrepreneurs and the policy window, which allows the latter to influence in the policy
process. With these five components of the MSF, I will try to explain change in this policy.
The time frame of analysis will consider the period 2000-2007 and different from the agenda-
setting focus, an extension of the model will be applied to the formulation stage due to the
problem was already in the agenda of government and because change was about the
consideration of a different policy to decrease the levels of obesity.
A preliminary explanation about this change is that policy entrepreneurs (the group of
politicians supported by the medical community) seized the opportunity of a policy window to
propose a new policy by coupling the three streams of Kingdon’s model in the following
manner:
The problem stream promoted the necessity to regulate food industry because two reasons.
First, the feedback giving by the WHO to all their members, including Chile, through its Global
Strategy against Obesity (2004) which key points, besides others, were regulation, advertising
and labelling. This also suggested that what had been done in the matter was not enough.
Second, cases related to intoxication of children drinking wrong labelled milk, the concern of
transgenic ingredients in foods and other similar situation covered by media, caused that
public attention started focus on the food industry.
The politics stream was favourable for the application of a regulatory policy because at that
time, a left party government was leading the country and its ideology favour ideas of state
regulation, as well as obesity issue was in the agenda of the government.
The policy stream presented a policy community shaped by different institutions depending on
the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education and lately, by representatives of the policy
industry which were supporting activities related to the promotion of healthy habits. The
policy community was flexible in the sense that the obesity problem could be considered as a
wieked issue in where multiple causes and multiple solutions to the problem can be
considered. The policy community was open for new ideas and also was disintegrated
(representatives of the food industry did not agreed about this new policy and took a distinct
path to get support to opposed this project), as well as a new policy community was shaped
between the Ministries and the policy entrepreneurs.
A preliminary critique about the model applied in the case is that it does not consider the
influence of networks, which could have been an important factor influencing the support of
the policy by the government and its agents. This, because who was leading the group of policy
entrepreneurs was a left party senator (Guido Girardi) very close to President Michelle
Bachelet.
Another factor to consider, is the prestigious work in which the law was based on. The
technical design of the law had been based on work of scientific community from Chile, the
World Health Organization and the Food Agriculture Organization. This fact might present a
sort of pressure in accepting this idea as an effective policy to contribute to solve the problem.
A final critique relies on one of the interpretation of the model’s expansion made by Lemieux
(2002). He suggests that policy formulation involves coupling the policy and political streams
while the third stream is present but “loosely coupled”, not giving it an important role in the
opportunity window opening. I argue that for this case study the problem stream is relevant
for seizing the policy window, because the feedback given by the WHO in its Global Strategy,
emphasizing the necessity of regulation and the problems related to wrong labelling and
transgenic foods were critical to considerate a new policy focused on the food industry
regulation.
